# Tools

Martin has a few additional tools that can be used to interact with the data.

## MBTiles tool
A small utility that allows users to interact with the `*.mbtiles` files from the command line. Use `mbtiles --help` to see a list of available commands, and `mbtiles <command> --help` to see help for a specific command.

This tool can be installed by compiling the latest released version with `cargo install martin-mbtiles`, or by downloading a pre-built binary from the [releases page](https://github.com/maplibre/martin/releases/latest).

### meta-all
Print all metadata values to stdout, as well as the results of tile detection. The format of the values printed is not stable, and should only be used for visual inspection.

```shell
mbtiles meta-all my_file.mbtiles
```

### meta-get
Retrieve raw metadata value by its name. The value is printed to stdout without any modifications.  For example, to get the `description` value from an mbtiles file:

```shell
mbtiles meta-get my_file.mbtiles description
```

### meta-set
Set metadata value by its name, or delete the key if no value is supplied. For example, to set the `description` value to `A vector tile dataset`:

```shell
mbtiles meta-set my_file.mbtiles description "A vector tile dataset"
```

### copy
Copy an mbtiles file, optionally filtering its content by zoom levels.

```shell
mbtiles copy src_file.mbtiles dst_file.mbtiles \
        --min-zoom 0 --max-zoom 10
```

Copy command can also be used to compare two mbtiles files and generate a delta (diff) file. The diff file can be applied to the `src_file.mbtiles` elsewhere, to avoid copying/transmitting the entire modified dataset.  The delta file will contain all tiles that are different between the two files (modifications, insertions, and deletions as `NULL` values), for both the tile and metadata tables.  

There is one exception: `agg_tiles_hash` metadata value will be renamed to `agg_tiles_hash_in_diff`, and a new `agg_tiles_hash` will be generated for the diff file itself. This is done to avoid confusion when applying the diff file to the original file, as the `agg_tiles_hash` value will be different after the diff is applied. The `apply-diff` command will automatically rename the `agg_tiles_hash_in_diff` value back to `agg_tiles_hash` when applying the diff.

```shell
mbtiles copy src_file.mbtiles diff_file.mbtiles \
         --diff-with-file modified_file.mbtiles
```

This command can also be used to generate files of different [supported schema](##supported-schema).
```shell
mbtiles copy normalized.mbtiles dst.mbtiles \
         --dst-mbttype flat-with-hash
```
### apply-diff
Apply the diff file generated from `copy` command above to an mbtiles file. The diff file can be applied to the `src_file.mbtiles` elsewhere, to avoid copying/transmitting the entire modified dataset.

Note that the `agg_tiles_hash_in_diff` metadata value will be renamed to `agg_tiles_hash` when applying the diff. This is done to avoid confusion when applying the diff file to the original file, as the `agg_tiles_hash` value will be different after the diff is applied.

```shell
mbtiles apply_diff src_file.mbtiles diff_file.mbtiles
```

Another way to apply the diff is to use the `sqlite3` command line tool directly. This SQL will delete all tiles from `src_file.mbtiles` that are set to `NULL` in `diff_file.mbtiles`, and then insert or update all new tiles from `diff_file.mbtiles` into `src_file.mbtiles`, where both files are of `flat` type. The name of the diff file is passed as a query parameter to the sqlite3 command line tool, and then used in the SQL statements.
```shell
sqlite3 src_file.mbtiles \
  -bail \
  -cmd ".parameter set @diffDbFilename diff_file.mbtiles" \
  "ATTACH DATABASE @diffDbFilename AS diffDb;" \
  "DELETE FROM tiles WHERE (zoom_level, tile_column, tile_row) IN (SELECT zoom_level, tile_column, tile_row FROM diffDb.tiles WHERE tile_data ISNULL);" \
  "INSERT OR REPLACE INTO tiles (zoom_level, tile_column, tile_row, tile_data) SELECT * FROM diffDb.tiles WHERE tile_data NOTNULL;"
```

### validate
If the `.mbtiles` file is of `flat_with_hash` or `normalized` type, then verify that the data stored in columns `tile_hash` and `tile_id` respectively are MD5 hashes of the `tile_data` column.
```shell
mbtiles validate src_file.mbtiles
```

## Content Validation
The original [MBTiles specification](https://github.com/mapbox/mbtiles-spec#readme) does not provide any guarantees for the content of the tile data in MBTiles. This tool adds a few additional conventions to ensure that the content of the tile data is valid.

A typical Normalized schema generated by tools like [tilelive-copy](https://github.com/mapbox/TileLive#bintilelive-copy) use MD5 hash in the `tile_id` column. The Martin's `mbtiles` tool can use this hash to verify the content of each tile. We also define a new `flat-with-hash` schema that stores the hash and tile data in the same table. This schema is more efficient than the `normalized` schema when data has no duplicate tiles (see below). Per tile validation is not available for `flat` schema.

Per-tile validation will catch individual invalid tiles, but it will not detect overall datastore corruption (e.g. missing tiles or tiles that shouldn't exist, or tiles with incorrect z/x/y values).
For that, Martin `mbtiles` tool defines a new metadata value called `agg_tiles_hash`. The value is computed by hashing `cast(zoom_level AS text), cast(tile_column AS text), cast(tile_row AS text), tile_data` combined for all rows in the `tiles` table/view, ordered by z,x,y.
In case there are no rows or all are NULL, the hash value of an empty string is used. Note that SQLite allows any value type to be stored as in any column, so if `tile_data` accidentally contains non-blob/text/null value, validation will fail.

The `mbtiles` tool will compute `agg_tiles_hash` value when copying or validating mbtiles files.

## Supported Schema
The `mbtiles` tool supports three different kinds of schema for `tiles` data in `.mbtiles` files. See also the original [specification](https://github.com/mapbox/mbtiles-spec#readme).

### flat
```sql, ignore
CREATE TABLE tiles (zoom_level integer, tile_column integer, tile_row integer, tile_data blob);
CREATE UNIQUE INDEX tile_index on tiles (zoom_level, tile_column, tile_row);
```

### flat-with-hash
```sql, ignore
CREATE TABLE tiles_with_hash (
  zoom_level integer NOT NULL,
  tile_column integer NOT NULL,
  tile_row integer NOT NULL,
  tile_data blob,
  tile_hash text);
CREATE UNIQUE INDEX tiles_with_hash_index on tiles_with_hash (zoom_level, tile_column, tile_row);
CREATE VIEW tiles AS SELECT zoom_level, tile_column, tile_row, tile_data FROM tiles_with_hash;
```

### normalized
```sql, ignore
CREATE TABLE map (zoom_level INTEGER, tile_column INTEGER, tile_row INTEGER, tile_id TEXT);
CREATE UNIQUE INDEX map_index ON map (zoom_level, tile_column, tile_row);
CREATE TABLE images (tile_id text, tile_data blob);
CREATE UNIQUE INDEX images_id ON images (tile_id);
CREATE VIEW tiles AS
  SELECT
      map.zoom_level AS zoom_level,
      map.tile_column AS tile_column,
      map.tile_row AS tile_row,
      images.tile_data AS tile_data
  FROM map
  JOIN images ON images.tile_id = map.tile_id;
```

Optionally, `.mbtiles` files with `normalized` schema can include a `tiles_with_hash` view:

```sql, ignore
CREATE VIEW tiles_with_hash AS
  SELECT
      map.zoom_level AS zoom_level,
      map.tile_column AS tile_column,
      map.tile_row AS tile_row,
      images.tile_data AS tile_data,
      images.tile_id AS tile_hash
  FROM map LEFT JOIN images ON map.tile_id = images.tile_id;
```

**__Note:__** All `normalized` files created by the `mbtiles` tool will contain this view.
